---
title: 5 tips for reusable components
lead: I've spent the last year helping build a design system. These are some of the things I learned along the way
author: Kristofer Selbekk
image: https://images.unsplash.com/photo-1528323273322-d81458248d40?ixlib=rb-1.2.1&ixid=eyJhcHBfaWQiOjEyMDd9&auto=format&fit=crop&w=2301&q=80
---

Building reusable components are harder than tutorials make it out to be -
especially when writing components for a design system. There are tons of
use cases to consider, and stakeholders you've never even met!

At my current project, I've helped flesh out a design system with React
components and other functionality for some time now. You can
[check it out here](https://design.sparebank1.no) (Norwegian only). It's not
perfect, but it sure let's us write apps a lot quicker, with a lot less bugs.

In this article, I'm going to share some of my learnings from this process. They
might not be ground breaking news to some, but if you're building components
that people outside your team end up using, they'll thank you for reading this.
Hopefully.

## Don't allow conflicting props

When you design the API of your component (that is, which props it should accept
and what to name them), consider whether or not a future requirement could lead
to props colliding or conflicting with each other.

Here's a Button component:

```js
import classNames from 'classnames';
const Button = ({ primary, children }) => (
  <button className={classNames('button', { 'button--primary': primary })}>
    {children}
  </button>
);
```

If you want a primary button, all you need to do is to pass `primary={true}`!
That's what you call a slick API, am I right? Nope.

It has two ways of looking - "regular" or "primary". Instinctively, this sounds
fine, but what if future you realize you also need a secondary button?

Now, your component will look like this:

```js
import classNames from 'classnames';
const Button = ({ primary, secondary, children }) => (
  <button
    className={classNames(
      'button',
      { 'button--primary': primary },
      { 'button--secondary': secondary }
    )}
  >
    {children}
  </button>
);
```

Now, that's a potential bug. What if some less experienced developer starts
applying both modifiers at once?

```js
<Button primary secondary>
  ALL OF YOUR BASE
</Button>
```

Instead, **introduce** a `buttonType` property, which accepts a string value of
either `primary`, `secondary` or whatever future you decides is appropriate.
This has proven to work great for us, and I think it'll work great for you too!

```js
import classNames from 'classnames';
const Button = ({ buttonType, children }) => (
  <button
    className={classNames(
      'button',
      { 'button--primary': buttonType === 'primary' },
      { 'button--secondary': buttonType === 'secondary' }
    )}
  >
    {children}
  </button>
);
```

## Always allow for element substitution

When I first started out as a developer, I was taught the somewhat charming
slogan that "assumptions are the mother of all fuck-ups". One thing we often
assume when we create reusable components, is the context they will be used in.

In HTML, some contexts require different semantics. If we return to our button,
we can't really use it if we want to link to something. I mean, technically we
can, but we can't use an `<a />` tag. Let's fix that.

By convention, I always support an `as` prop, which either accepts a component
or a string.

```js
const Button = ({ as: Element, buttonType, children }) => (
  <Element className={/* as before*/}>
    {children}
  </Element>
);
Button.defaultProps = {
  as: 'button',
};
```

Here, I'm renaming the `as` prop to `Element` (just for clarity's sake), and
refering to _that_ component instead of the hard coded `button`. Since I'm
defaulting the `as` prop to be `button`, things work just as before if I don't
specify `as`.

If I later want to use the Button component with a `<a />` tag or a `<Link />`
tag (from `react-router`, for instance), I can do so without creating a new
component!

```js
<Button as="a" href="https://react.christmas">Go learn stuff</Button>
<Button as={Link} to="/">Go home</Button>
<Button buttonType="primary">Buy stuff</Button>
```

## Pass all unspecified props

When you at first implement a component (particularly lower-level ones like
buttons, typography etc), you're not going to have a clue about what future you
are going to throw at it. In that case - assume nothing, and just apply any
non-API props to the root element!

```js
const Button = ({ as: Element, buttonType, children, ...rest }) => (
  <Element className={/* as before */} {...rest}>
    {children}
  </Element>
);
```

or, even simpler (since `children` is a regular prop, too):

```js
const Button = ({ as: Element, buttonType, ...rest }) => (
  <Element className={/* as before */} {...rest} />
);
```

This way, when future you (or your colleagues) need support for `onMouseEnter`,
`tabIndex` or `aria-describedby`, you don't need to go and add another prop for
that. Just spread whatever the user passes in to your root element, and you
should be good to go.

One final thing to remember is `className`. `className` is a prop that's
typically set from the get-go, and in those cases, you should make sure to allow
the consumer to add to the existing class names, not overwrite them. You can fix
that by applying it like this:

```js
const Button = ({ as: Element, buttonType, className, ...rest }) => (
  <Element
    className={classNames(
      'button',
      { 'button--primary': buttonType === 'primary' },
      { 'button--secondary': buttonType === 'secondary' },
      className
    )}
    {...rest}
  />
);
```

## Never rename existing DOM-props!

When we started out with our design system, we tried to be clever, and rename
existing DOM props to make them more in line with the rest. That is a terrible
idea.

Buttons, for example, have a `type` property. It's what decides whether a button
submits a form, resets it, or does nothing at all. However, "type" is a pretty
usable name - for example if we wanted to specify the visual type, like above.

It might be tempting to "repurpose" DOM properties, because they might not make
sense in the moment. But stay away from them! Changing from `type` to
`buttonType` at a later time, for instance, is a really annoying breaking change
that's going to piss off your consumers. Believe me - I did exactly that.

## Only allow one way of doing things

The last foot-gun I'm going to warn you about today, is the fallacy that several
ways of providing a value is convenient. Take our trusted ol' `<Button />`. When
we first created it, we provided the content as a `label` prop. Then, as time
went by, some clever developer (probably me), added the possibility of sending
in content via the `children` prop. However, our implementation now looked like
this:

```js
const Button = ({
  as: Element,
  children,
  label,
  ...rest
}) => (
  <Element
    className={/* as before*/}
    {...rest}
  >
    {label || children}
  </Element>
);
```

Now, we had to explain to all consumers that you could do both, but if you did,
`label` would take presedence over `children`. That led to much more confusion
than it solved.

So don't do that. Use `children` for content if possible, and never allow for
several ways of doing the same thing.

Another example of this is when we needed to add some invalid styles to input
fields. We added an `invalid` prop, and set the `aria-invalid` tag based on its
value:

```js
const InputField = ({ invalid, ...rest }) => (
  <input aria-invalid={invalid ? 'true' : 'false'} {...rest} />
);
```

Seems fair enough - but you could actually do the same by letting the consumer
pass the `aria-invalid` prop themselves! This is a known API from HTML, and
almost as convenient too.

## Go create reusable stuff!

I hope this article has given you some new ideas as to how you could structure
your components and their APIs. As an added bonus, if you follow these
principles in your apps as well, you end up refactoring less, and reusing more.

Thanks for reading!
