In React, data is passed from parent to child with the help of props. This works fine most of the time. However, it can be cumbersome in certain situations where props are required by many components within an applicaiton. Svein Petter spend most of his days working for an international company that supports multiple languages. Various translations are required through the application in many different components.
- Pain of prop drilling

Context provides a way to easily share values, like translations, between components without explicitly passing props from parent to child. This is useful for values that are considered global such as themes, translations or data about an authenticated user.  

## React.createContext
Is used to initialise the context and it return an object with a Provider and a Consumer

## Context.Provider
Every context object comes with a provider which allows other consuming components to listen for context changes. Provider is a root component and any child have access to the values provided by the context provider.
+ Accept Value prop
+ One provider can be connected to many consumers

## Context.Consumer
+ Consumer consumes the data which is being passed
+ samme hvor dypt nøstet komponenten er i treet (trenger ikke være direkte underordnet)

## this.context
- Dersom det kun foreligger en context provider trenger man ikke bruke en consumer man kan hente ut verdien direkte fra klassen.
- komponent.contextType = ReindeerContext;

## HOCs to the rescue

Let's be honest. Repeatedly writing `<RandomContext.Consumer>`and using the [render props pattern](https://reactjs.org/docs/render-props.html) isn't much better than passing props around your application. To avoid this you can create a higher order component (HOC) that assigns the desired values from the context to your component.

```
import * as React from 'react';
import { ReindeerContext } from '<path_to_your_context>';

const withFavouriteReindeer = (Component) => {
    return (props) => (
        <ReindeerContext.Consumer>
            {(context) => (
                <Component
                    {...props}
                    favouriteReindeer={context.favouriteReindeer}
                />
            )}
        </ReindeerContext.Consumer>
    );
};
export default withFavouriteReindeer;
```

Awesome! Now we can enhance our component with `withFavouriteReindeer` and `favouriteReindeer` will be available as a prop.

```
const ComponentWithoutContext = ({ favouriteReindeer }) => (
  <p>{`Favourite reindeer: ${favouriteReindeer}`}</p>
)

const ComponentWithFavouriteReindeer = withFavouriteReindeer(ComponentWithoutContext);
```

If you initialized your context correctly with `React.createContext` Rudolph should be displayed as the favourite reindeer when the component is used.


*Rudolph the Red-Nosed Reindeer.* 🎵 🎅
