---
title: CSS in your React app
lead: A hot topic these days, and I don't think we'll ever agree, but here are some ways to do CSS in your React app
author: Eirik Luka
image: https://images.unsplash.com/photo-1495055677746-95ca83e56309?ixlib=rb-1.2.1&ixid=eyJhcHBfaWQiOjEyMDd9&auto=format&fit=crop&w=3300&q=80
---

# Getting started using Create React App

If you are starting from scratch [Create React App (CRA)](https://facebook.github.io/create-react-app/) is a great way to get you going. Without any configuration you can just import your CSS-files like you import your React components. Since CRA uses `Babel` you can also use ES6 imports for this

```jsx
import './App.css';
```

Since CRA version 2.0, support also includes auto-prefixing, so there is no need to write browser specific CSS like `-webkit-*` or similar prefixes anymore.

## Sass

Using [Sass](https://sass-lang.com/) is also available, just make sure you add `node-sass` to your project, then you can import your `.scss`-files directly

```jsx
import './App.scss';
```

CSS preprocessors like Sass or LESS builds upon CSS and adds features like variables, functions and nesting. CSS variables is already supported in some browsers, but lack of support in IE and Edge still is a deal breaker for many.

## CSS Modules

CRA also supports CSS Modules. For each component you want to style you can now create an associated CSS-file, just add `.module.css` (or `.module.scss` if you're using Sass) to the file name.

```jsx
import styles from './main-title.module.css';

const MainTitle = () => {
  return <h1 className={styles.mainTitle}>CSS Modules</h1>;
};
```

Using CSS Modules allows you to scope your css to the component, meaning if you have another component that has a class `.mainTitle` it will not be affected. If you inspect your component in your browser the actual class name will be postfixed `.mainTitle__yLE5s` making it unique for that component.

## But I don't use Create React App

Well, then you have to do the build setup yourself, but it is still possible to get CSS Modules, Sass, LESS, and there are plenty of tutorials out there to help you get going. [Here is an example](https://medium.com/@joseph0crick/react-css-modules-less-webpack-4-a50d902d0a3) using LESS and CSS Modules.

# CSS-in-JS

CSS-in-JS basically allows you to create component scoped CSS in JS. Similar to CSS Modules you will get unique classes for each component preventing different component styles for overwriting each other.

Keep in mind CSS-in-JS and inline styling is **not** the same thing. Inline styling adds the styling directly to the component, which gives you less control over your styles,decreases performance, and should be avoided.

Let me show you an example how CSS-in-JS works using the styled-components library

```jsx
import styled from 'styled-components';

const MainTitle = styled.h1`
  font-family: sans-serif;
  text-decoration: underline;
`;

const MyComponent = () => <MainTitle>CSS-in-JS! Yeah!</MainTitle>;
```

This will give you something like this

```html
<style>
  .sc-emjYpo {
    font-family: sans-serif;
    text-decoration: underline;
  }
</style>

...

<h1 class="sc-emjYpo gyAZJU">CSS-in-JS! Yeah!</h1>
```

The `<style>` is applied to the top of the DOM with a unique class name for your component.

There are several libraries you pick from. [Emotion](https://github.com/emotion-js/emotion), [styled-components](https://www.styled-components.com/) and [JSS](https://cssinjs.org) are three examples. You don't need any additional build steps to get started, just add your desired library to your project.

Using JavaScript to describe how your components look is appealing to many, and has both pros and cons. In [this Gist](https://gist.github.com/threepointone/731b0c47e78d8350ae4e105c1a83867d) from Sunil Pai of the React team, he tries to shed some light on the advantages and disadvantages of CSS-in-JS. I recommend having his post and the following discussion a read, if you're intrested.

# What should I use?

There are many good reasons to use any of the mentioned ways to style your app, but there is no right answer. Pick the one that best suits your needs and stick with it. If you can't decide take some time to read some posts about the advantages of the different librarys/frameworks
