---
title: What is this JSX business?
lead: One of the weirdest things to me when I started learning React was this JSX syntax. What is it? Where does it come from? And how can I make really cool stuff with this?
author: Kristofer Selbekk
links:
    - title: Introducing JSX
      link: https://reactjs.org/docs/introducing-jsx.html
      body: A great intro on JSX that introduces some of the themes in this article in greater detail
    - title: JSX in depth
      link: https://reactjs.org/docs/jsx-in-depth.html
      body: A nice deep dive into JSX and some of its more overlooked features. A must read any React-fan, really
    - title: The other side of the coin
      link: https://medium.freecodecamp.org/react-s-jsx-the-other-side-of-the-coin-2ace7ab62b98
      body: An in-depth look on why JSX is a good idea and how it came to be
---

JSX is a syntax extension to JavaScript, based loosely on the now-defunct E4X standard and kind of looks like this:

```javascript
<SomeComponent someProp={someValue}>
  <h1 className="heading">Hello world</h1>
</SomeComponent>
```

In layman's terms, however, JSX is simply syntactic sugar for `React.createElement(component, props, children)`.
That means, the code above is transpiled (or translated) into the following:

```javascript
React.createElement(SomeComponent, { someProp: someValue },
    React.createElement('h1', { className: 'heading' },
        'Hello world',
    );
);
```

Since the latter is neither very simple to read nor particularly user-friendly, Facebook came up with this XML-inspired
syntax now known as JSX. You can play with this [babel compiler
example](https://babeljs.io/repl/#?presets=react&code_lz=GYVwdgxgLglg9mABACwKYBt1wBQEpEDeAUIogE6pQhlIA8AJjAG4B8AEhlogO5xnr0AhLQD0jVgG4iAXyJA)
to see how this works with your own code.

## Conditional rendering

If you've used React for any amount of time, you've probably run into situations where you want to render something if
a particular condition is met. JSX has this quirk that it doesn't render `undefined`, `false`, `true` and
`null`, and you can use that fact to render something only if your condition is met:

```javascript
const ArticleCard = (props = (
  <div>
    {props.title && <h2>{props.title}</h2>}
    {props.lead ? <p className="lead">{props.lead}</p> : null}
    {props.body}
  </div>
));
```

Note that I just showed you two different ways of doing the same thing - both with something called logical short
circuting (`&&`) and ternaries (`a ? b : c`). Both are valid and both work, but I tend to use the first approach
in my own projects.

## Props default to true!

If you've specified a prop, but not given it a value, it defaults to true. That means the following two components are
equal:

```javascript
<Button large={true}>Click me</Button>
<Button large>Click me</Button>
```

I tend to use the former, just so that I don't have to remember this little detail of the JSX spec, but it's definitely
nice to know about. It can potentially make your code look a lot cleaner as well!

## Components must be capitalized

When you transpile your code, you'll notice that lower case component names are passed as strings to
`React.createElement`, while capitalized component names are passed as a reference to the component name:

```javascript
<hello /> // becomes React.createElement('hello');
<Hello /> // becomes React.createElement(Hello);
```

This might lead to some problems, especially if you have a component that receives the DOM element it's supposed to
render as a prop.

```javascript
const Heading = props => {
  const { tagName, children } = props;
  return <tagName>{children}</tagName>;
};
```

However, you can get around this limitation by renaming that constant to have a capitalized first letter:

```javascript
const Heading = props => {
  const { tagName: TagName, children } = props;
  return <TagName>{children}</TagName>;
};
```

## Those damn children

JSX handles the `children` property a bit different than the rest, in that you can specify it inside the opening
and closing tags of your component. React, however, doesn't really care - it's just props to them.

This means you can send in some other JSX, a string literal or even an array or a function as children. You can also
just specify children as a regular prop, making the following two statements equal:

```javascript
<h1>My heading</h1>
<h1 children="My heading" />
```

The latter approach is probably not something you'll see a lot in the real world, but the fact that children really just
is a regular property (and not something magic) is great. If you've been following this calendar over the last few days,
then you probably remember [the article on HOCs and render props](/2017/07) , which uses this fact to send in a function that
renders JSX instead of plain JSX.

## JSX is yay!

There is tons more to learn about JSX, but as long as you remember the beginning of this article, you should be good:
JSX is just syntactic sugar for `React.createElement`. Now go make something cool!
