---
title: Functional vs class components
lead: In React, there are two types of components - functional and class-based. What's the difference and when should you use each one?
author: Kristofer Selbekk
links:
    - title: State and lifecycle
      link: https://reactjs.org/docs/state-and-lifecycle.html
      body: The React docs does a great job of explaining the differences between functional and class based components
    - title: Stateful vs stateless components
      link: https://code.tutsplus.com/tutorials/stateful-vs-stateless-functional-components-in-react--cms-29541
      body: A very detailed article that explains the differences between stateful and stateless components
    - title: 45x faster functional components
      link: https://medium.com/missive-app/45-faster-react-functional-components-now-3509a668e69f
      body: A cool little hack to improve the performance of functional components - make sure to read the comments!
---

React is all about components. These little nuggets of UI compose together to create your application. Some are really
versatile and reusable (like `<Button />` or `<InputField />` components), while others are one-off containers
that provide functions to fetch or send data to APIs, as well as orchestrating that data for use by other components
(like `<CommentsSection />` or `<ArticlePage />` components). In other words - components can be pretty different!

To deal with this difference, React provides two different types of components - we'll call them functional and class
based. This article will describe the upsides and downsides of both, and then provide you with a suggestion of when
you should use each approach.

## Functional components: A great place to start!

A functional component is a regular pure JavaScript function that accepts props as its argument, and returns some JSX.
Here are two simple examples:

```javascript
function Heading(props) {
  return <h1>{props.children}</h1>;
}

const Button = props => <button className="button" {...props} />;
```

They look so innocent! And that's the beauty of functional components - they are simple to both read and understand,
and there is almost no boilerplate to make them!

Actually, most of the components I write are functional components, and close to every single one of them start out that
way. It's a great way to make sure you're making each part of your application as simple and reusable as possible!

## Class based components: When you need a little bit more oomph!

A class based component is - surprise, surprise - a JavaScript class. It extends `React.Component`, and its only
required method is `render()`. Here's an example of one of those:

```javascript
class Heading extends React.Component {
  render() {
    return <h1>{this.props.children}</h1>;
  }
}
```

This component is - as far as React is concerned - functionally equal to the first functional component example above.
But this component has some pretty neat super powers underneath the surface.

### You get lifecycle hooks!

React provides a bunch of so-called **lifecycle hooks** - or methods that are called at certain points in the component's
lifecycle. You can read about them in detail [here](https://reactjs.org/docs/react-component.html). Basically,
there are methods for when the component is rendered and removed to and from the DOM, as well as whenever it's updated
with new state or props.

### You get internal state!

Although most state can be passed down as props from containing components or a central state management library like
Redux, some state is internal to a component and doesn't need to be anywhere else. This could be whether or not an
accordion component is open or closed, or perhaps the currently selected item in a dropdown.

Class-based components give you a property called `this.state` to read state from and a method `this.setState`
that lets you update it. There's actually tons of stuff you can do with internal state, and I
[wrote about it here](/2017/04).

### You (can) get performance increases!

Another great aspect of class-based components is that you can decide whether or not they should update. This might or
might not be important to your application - but when it is, there's some pretty simple things you can do to boost
performance with this kind of component.

One way to improve performance (i.e. the amount of re-renders your component does) is to implement a
`shouldComponentUpdate` method. This method gives you the next and current props and state, and lets you implement
a boolean expression that triggers a re-render or not.

A much simpler way which is good enough for most cases, is to extend the `React.PureComponent` class instead of
`React.Component`. This one comes with a simple implementation of the `shouldComponentUpdate` method, that just
checks whether the current and next state and props are equal. Turns out, this little trick alone can make huge and slow
application quicker in a matter of four characters!

## So which ones should you choose to use?

Well, it depends on your usecase. The incredible simplicity of functional components make them a great place to start
out, and if you need some of the cool features you get with class-based components you can simply "upgrade" your
component whenever those needs come around. At least, that's what I do.
