---
title: A bit about context
lead: Context is one of those features of React you rarely need to use - but understanding what it is and how it works makes you a much better developer!
author: Kristofer Selbekk
links:
    - title: Context documentation
      link: https://reactjs.org/docs/context.html
      body: The place to start your path to understanding context
    - title: How to safely use React context
      link: https://medium.com/@mweststrate/how-to-safely-use-react-context-b7e343eff076
      body: A great article explaining context and how to use it safely
    - title: How to handle React context in a reliaby way
      link: https://medium.com/react-ecosystem/how-to-handle-react-context-a7592dfdcbc
      body: A more in-depth look at context. Great read!
---

React's way of dealing with dataflow is one of it's greatest features in my mind. Each component renders based on
information passed down by its parent, and might (or might not) have some internal state to supplement this data.

Some times though, you need to pass data from way up the component tree to somewhere deep down. Passing props to a
component, only for that component to pass it down to some other component, is not a great pattern. This is where
context comes in.

## So what is context?

Context is a way to circumventing this wonderful dataflow, by passing data via a "back channel". It lets you pass data
from one component (called a context provider) to another (called a context consumer) without passing data directly
via props. They don't even have to be direct descendants of one another!

## How does it look?

A _context provider_ is a class component that implements the method `getChildContext()` and the static property
`childContextTypes`. Here's what it looks like:

```javascript
class ThemeProvider extends React.Component {
  static childContextTypes = {
    color: PropTypes.string,
  };

  getChildContext() {
    return { color: this.props.color };
  }

  render() {
    return this.props.children;
  }
}
```

This component takes a prop as color, and "provides" it as context to whoever wants to listen. Whenever the prop
changes, the context will be updated.

A _context consumer_ is one such component that wants to listen. It only requires the static property `contextTypes`,
and will receive the context as `this.context` (or as a second argument to a functional component). Here's an example
of how a consumer looks:

```javascript
class ThemedButton extends React.Component {
  static contextTypes = {
    color: PropTypes.string,
  };

  render() {
    return (
      <button style={{ backgroundColor: this.context.color }}>
        {this.props.children}
      </button>
    );
  }
}
```

Note that both `childContextTypes` and `contextTypes` are using the `prop-types` library - because context is
just data, and that library works great for describing data structures.

## So why shouldn't I use it?

Although context is a supported feature that's not going away anytime soon, [React warns you about using
it](https://reactjs.org/docs/context.html#why-not-to-use-context). And reality is - it's with good reason.

First off, the context API is not considered stable, and is likely to change in future releases. Depending on it as of
today would therefore provide your app with a potentially gruesome update path - and that's not cool.

Second, using context makes your components less reusable. You would _have to_ wrap any context consumers in its
matching context provider, or it just won't work.

Third, and most importantly, context won't be updated whenever an intermediate component returns `false` from its
`shouldComponentUpdate`. That means you might not get the updated context you were expecting.

## So why do I care?

Turns out, a lot of libraries use context to pass information about stuff like state, internationalization and routing.
`react-redux` does it, `react-router` does it, and tons of others do the same. As it turns out, using libraries
who uses context below the surface is not such a bad thing. The library authors shield you from the complexities and
quirks of the context API and find ways around the update blocking problem.

Understanding how these libraries - which many developers look at like they're performing magic - is important. It's
nothing more special than regular React, and creating your own almost-as-good version (or perhaps even better, given
your use case) is far from impossible.

I hope you learned a tiny bit about context in today's article, and that you have a look at the attached resources
below. I've found some great articles that go much further in explaining how this context thing works :)
